---
layout: post
title: What Makes A Good Tech Lead?
---

My employer, [Pillar Technology](http://www.pillartechnology.com), has challenged everyone in the company to put down some thoughts on what makes a good Tech Lead.

Based on a bit of searching with my friend Dr. Google, it looks like many people (especially recruiters) have gone to great breathless lengths to define just such a person.

It usually begins with a long, formal litany composed of some ridiculous experience wishes.

More Perl experience than Larry Wall (even if this is not a Perl development position?)  Yeah, that sounds right.

Eight years plus of Swift development?  Oh yeah.  Accept nothing less.

TDD all the things?  Sure, if one likes software that actually works.

Experience leveraging SDL best practices within revolutionary, paradigm breaking six-sigma SAAS business cases to synergize a consistent GUI design for mobile and desktop, supporting our mission statement / ROI via the 5-vector Web 2.0 model through enhanced remote team utilization?

Uhhh...

Absolutely.  Absolutely.

And so on.

Further down this list, if you are lucky, you might see some weirder requirements like "demonstrated ability to work with team members" or "conduct 'Agile' meetings" (quotes around Agile are verbatim from a posting I found, seriously) or "cross functional coordination experience" or "strong interpersonal skills in working with the customer, project manager and other technical team members"

So, ridiculously wide, yet narrowly experienced developers who may / may not have a high EQ.

Hmn.

Is this really all different from what one might post looking for a normal run-of-the-mill developer?  What makes a Tech Lead all that different?  Is it a greater breadth of experience?  Longer time on the job?  Good references?

I believe defining a great Tech Lead can be much simpler than all this.

A great Tech Lead simply gives a damn.

Sound crazy?

Well, lets take a look at the Agile Manifesto.

The Agile Manifesto does not take four paragraphs to breathlessly list needed years of experience making products using technology XYZ.  It also (somewhat surprisingly) does not point a shameful finger to those who do not regularily worship at the church / synagogue of 'Agile'

Point number one of the Agile Manifesto states "Individuals and interactions over processes and tools"

Sure, we as software developers tinker with computers.  Its an important part of what we do.  We have buzzwords and timekeeping instruments to prove to ourselves and to others that we have indeed done this tinkering, and, if trends continue, we could do it again.

But most importantly, great developers deliver value to the end user.

In doing this, we cannot work in a sterile vacuum, surrounded by our tools and certificates of accomplishment.  We work with people.  If only this were as simple as using the correct processes and tools.

If you were to ask the team that I'm on right now (or any team that I've been a member of in the past) what their biggest gripe is (and knowing some of the characters I've worked with, you probably won't have to prod all that hard), their answer would not fall anywhere close to stuff that is listed in a Tech Lead's job posting.

It's about dealing with vague requirements.

Emotional stress after getting chewed out by a customer.

Knowing that the team needs to keep moving, but there isn't any backlog because no one knows what to do or has the guts to suggest a course of action.

Being blocked while waiting for work from another team.

Dealing with a member of the team that isn't pulling their weight.

Not feeling like they're growing or contributing.

...  and so on.

Maybe if most recruiters knew this, they'd ask for a Tech Lead who is a technical badass _and_ an experienced psychologist.  Or military interrogator.  Or Oprah.

Yes, a Tech Lead needs to deal primarily with his / her people, not "Tech".

When a customer is being irrational or hostile, it is up to the Tech Lead to both shelter the team from this storm and interpret the needs of the customer accurately.

When a team is underperforming, it is up to the Tech Lead to determine the root cause, curb, admonish, and show the way back to productivity.

When a new problem or feature comes to the team, it is not up to the Tech Lead to knock it out of the park and be some sort of hero, but he / she needs to feed it to his / her team members, clear a path to success, and watch them succeed.

When a team is losing steam, the Tech Lead needs to be the (possibly lone) champion for the product, mission, and end goals and infuse enthusiasm into the team or stir their professional instincts to deliver.

When the team cannot deliver to a pre-agreed level of technical excellence, the Tech Lead needs to point the team into a better direction, challenge them to get there, and lead by example.

When a team member is overenthusiastic about brand new technology XYZ that doesn't fit into the budget or scope of the current project, the Tech Lead needs to find a way to get him / her to calm down without destroying their curiosity or excitement.

While many of these problems can and should be addressed by fellow members of an agile team, the buck stops at the Tech Lead.  They cannot allow the team to take a pass on any of these things.

Unlike technical problems which will still be there tomorrow morning when you just don't have the oomph or desire to tackle it today, soft problems such as these may not take time off outside of the 9 to 5 and need to be identified, heard out, and addressed (if possible).

If one cannot give a damn, it is easy to let problems such as these slide.  Members of an agile team, and great Tech Leads in particular, cannot and should not let this happen.

Currently Listening To: [Pt. #1, Chevelle](https://youtu.be/Boqr-4qUqLg)
